Tips for Protecting Children in Violence-Based
Emergencies
Shooting violence in schools account for less than one percent of deaths of school-aged youth. However, 70 percent of
parents are at least somewhat concerned about the risk their child faces from school shootings with more than one-third of
parents reporting being very concerned about the prospect. Practicing lockdown and shooter drills have the potential to
empower staff and save lives, but without proper caution, they can risk causing harm to participants. Here are some tips from
Save the Children and Safe and Sound Schools on how to keep children safe in violent emergency situations.
1. Talk to Children About Violence-Based Emergencies. This is particularly important if your child has learned
about a recent emergency situation. Talk about violence-based emergencies generally and in an age-appropriate way
allowing for children to express their concerns or ask questions. Refrain from sharing graphic details, but use the
opportunity to talk through any concerns that your child may have. First, listen carefully to your children, reassure
them and be honest. Never lie to children. Address any inaccurate concerns that they may have (e.g., school
shootings happen frequently; children are not safe at school). Focus on safety, helping children recognize the plans
that are in place to protect them in all types of emergency situations.
2. Teach Children Response Options: There may be a few ways to respond to an intruder based on where the
intruder or danger is located. Make sure that the response options below (Get Out, Stay Out, Hide Out) are presented
as choices and not expectations.
 Get Out: If it is possible to get away from danger, go to a safe place. Teachers, leaders and first responders will
come to find you in your meeting place or another place.
 Keep Out: If it is not possible to get out of the building or out of harm’s way, keep danger out of the room by
locking and blocking doors and staying away from windows.
 Hide Out: Stay out of sight from danger by hiding behind or large pieces of furniture. Try to stay as quiet so we
know can know if we need to get out or when the danger has passed.
3. It’s Normal to Be Scared: Everyone feels afraid when they are in danger. Fear is how our bodies alert us and
prepare us for action in times of danger. Help children understand that their natural reactions to danger (e.g., freeze or
flight) are normal and these choices are not wrong or inadequate.
4. Follow the Leader: Teach children that there are adults like teachers, leaders and first responders that will be
working to keep them safe. It’s important to stay quiet and listen to teachers and for directions.
5. It’s Okay to Break the Rules: Sometimes children may be separated from their leader or teacher. In the absence of
an adult, kids may have to make safety choices on their own. Let children know that no one will be angry at them for
breaking rules (like throwing things, entering staff-only areas, or running in the hall) to be safe.
6. Practice Makes Progress. By practicing different response options children are more likely to have confidence to
make a safe decision in an actual emergency situation. Practice lockdown and shooter drills that are developed and
implemented by a multidisciplinary safety team and informed by mental health professional. Make sure the complexity
of the drills and how they are communicated are age appropriate.
501 Kings Highway East
Suite 400
Fairfield, CT 06825
1-800 Save the Children
SavetheChildren.org
7. Increase Drill Complexity as Children Develop: Participation in drills should be
appropriate to individual development levels and take into consideration prior traumatic
experiences special needs and personalities. As children mature, they can handle more
information and more complex drills.
8. Parents Should Have a Choice: Parents should always be informed and educated about the types of safety
education, programming and drills that are planned for a school or program site before they are implemented. Parents
should always be allowed to opt their children out of such programming and provide feedback.
9. Be Reassuring: Children model their reactions on adult behavior so effective drills should result in staff who inspire
calm and confidence in children. Remind children that there are caring adults who will be working to keep them safe
in all types of emergency situations.
10. Learn to Recognize Signs of Trauma: Although it may be normal for children to be a little anxious during
emergency drills, if children appear extremely fearful, angry or withdrawn during or following a drilling exercise seek
professional help. Involve mental health professionals in the development and implementation of drilling exercises.
Sources:
Stay Safe Choices. 2013. Safe and Sound: A Sandy Hook Initiative.
Best Practice Considerations for Schools in Active Shooter and Other Armed Assailant Drills. 2014. National Association of
School Psychologists and National Association of School Resource Officers.
Emergency Education and Training Activities
Basic: All ages
Introduction to Safety Concepts: Help children learn to identify adults who can help them in emergency situations,
including what they might look like (i.e., with uniforms, or masks) and what kinds of tools they carry as helpers. An example
would be inviting a first responder to visit your classroom or program.
Familiarity with Surroundings: Tour the building or facilities and have a scavenger hunt helping children recognize possible
exits, phone location, first aid materials, light switches, supplies kits, and other materials. Help kids get basically familiar with
areas that are typically off limits during a school or program hours, such as the staff lounge, front office space and other halls
or doors that could be used for evacuation or sheltering in place during an emergency.
Beginner: Elementary and above
Educational Media: Present age-appropriate, non-threatening stories of emergency protocol that help children see safe
behaviors being practiced. Ensure a multi-disciplinary team is involved in the development and/or review of the materials and
present to parents in advance so they can choose to opt out their child.
501 Kings Highway East
Suite 400
Fairfield, CT 06825
1-800 Save the Children
SavetheChildren.org
Scenario Discussions: Create no-and low-stress opportunities to talk through safety scenarios,
including potential actions and available tools for children and teachers. Have children brainstorm,
discuss, problem-solve multiple situations. For young children, use a game format to spark
discussions, such as “What Are Sammy’s Safe Choices?” Teenagers can engage in more intensive strategic discussions.
Children’s participation in scenario discussions help with mental preparation, improved awareness and overall readiness for
emergencies.
Walk Through Drills: These low-stress drills help children act out safety actions that might occur during an emergency.
They are not time or rushed and leaders can use this time to demonstrate necessary steps or available options. A walk through
drill could be considered a “slow motion drill” that allows for questions and discussion along the way.
Intermediate:
Pre-announced Drills: This is an announced rehearsal of emergency responses and protocols. All participants know that this
is not a real emergency. Children should be instructed to act and follow instructions as if it were a real emergency.
Unannounced Drills: These drills are not recommended for active shooter drills. An unannounced drill simulates real-world
conditions in that it is unexpected. Participants are encouraged to treat the drill as a possible emergency and follow all
necessary protocols.
Advanced:
Full Scale Drills, Simulations and Advanced Simulations require an increasing level of involvement and participation of
first responders and other local government agencies. While these are critical in improving and coordinating emergency plans
and protocols for schools and other child-serving organizations, children’s participation should be limited.
Source:
Hierarchy of Education and Training Activities. 2013. Safe and Sound: A Sandy Hook Initiative.